This project implements an IoT-based Predictive Maintenance System to monitor motor vibration data, detect anomalies, and predict equipment failures using an LSTM model. The workflow involves data collection, preprocessing, feature engineering, model training, evaluation, and deployment on a cloud platform for real-time monitoring.
Project Structure
Data Collection

Gather 1 year of motor vibration data with failure labels.
Store the data in CSV or database formats for analysis.
Preprocessing

Clean, normalize, and filter sensor data.
Extract meaningful features like peak vibration values.
Feature Engineering

Derive advanced features, such as:
Vibration trend.
Deviation from the mean.
Exponential moving average of vibration.
Model Training

Train an LSTM (Long Short-Term Memory) model to forecast vibration trends and predict failure probabilities.
Save the trained model in .h5 format.
Evaluation

Validate the model on unseen test data.
Assess performance using metrics like accuracy, precision, recall, and AUC (Area Under the Curve).
Deployment

Deploy the trained model on a cloud platform (AWS, Azure, or Google Cloud).
Enable real-time predictions and alerts using cloud functions and dashboards.
Setup and Installation
1. Prerequisites
Python 3.8 or higher.
Libraries: pandas, numpy, tensorflow, scikit-learn, matplotlib, boto3 (for AWS integration).
Cloud Account (AWS, Azure, or Google Cloud).
2. Installation
Install the required dependencies:

bash
Copy code
pip install pandas numpy tensorflow scikit-learn matplotlib boto3
How to Run
1. Data Collection
Save the raw vibration data in a CSV file named vibration_data.csv. Include columns for:

Timestamp.
Vibration readings.
Failure labels (1 for failure, 0 for normal).
2. Preprocessing
Run the preprocessing script to clean and normalize the data:

python
Copy code
python preprocessing.py
This script:

Normalizes data using MinMaxScaler.
Filters noise using a low-pass filter.
Outputs preprocessed_data.csv.
3. Feature Engineering
Generate derived features using the feature engineering script:

python
Copy code
python feature_engineering.py
This script:

Adds trend, deviation, and moving average features.
Outputs vibration_data_with_features.csv.
4. Model Training
Train the LSTM model using the training script:

python
Copy code
python model_training.py
This script:

Trains an LSTM model on the feature-engineered dataset.
Saves the model as lstm_failure_prediction_model.h5.
5. Evaluation
Evaluate the model's performance on the test set:

python
Copy code
python model_evaluation.py
This script:

Validates the model using metrics like confusion matrix, precision, and recall.
Plots the ROC curve.
6. Deployment
Deploy the trained model on a cloud platform using cloud-specific tools:

For AWS Lambda, package the deployment script and model into a ZIP file and upload it.
For Azure Functions, upload the script and configure the function to handle HTTP triggers.
Files and Scripts
preprocessing.py: Cleans and normalizes sensor data.
feature_engineering.py: Adds derived features.
model_training.py: Trains and saves the LSTM model.
model_evaluation.py: Evaluates the model and plots results.
deployment_lambda.py: Example deployment script for AWS Lambda.
Results and Outputs
Model Accuracy: Accuracy, recall, precision, and F1 scores.
Predictions: Failure probabilities for real-time data.
Alerts: Automated alerts for anomalous conditions (via email, SMS, or dashboard).
Future Improvements
Use advanced architectures like GRU or Transformer for better time-series predictions.
Automate retraining with live data.
Improve scalability for multi-site deployments.
